(slow, cheery music)
(whistling)
Welcome back, in this video we're gonna talk
about nesting flexbox and how you can use that
to your advantage when doing a little bit more
of a complex layout than the stuff we've been doing so far.
And this is something that I stumbled upon fairly recently.
And it was something like this.
So we have like, a slider up here
and I just put an image there
to kinda give you a feel for it.
And then underneath the slider we had all of these items
that were for each slide.
So, maybe these four slides here,
then we had back and next buttons.
And I wanted to use flexbox because I wasn't sure how many
of these items were going to be added.
There might be four, there might be two,
there might be three.
And then I also wanted to make sure
that the arrows didn't take up as much space
as the rest of 'em.
So, perfect use case for flexbox.
Where I ran into some trouble was,
I have these, if you just look at the HTML here.
I've got this ul which is gonna be my flex container.
And then I've got li, and inside of that, I have a link.
A pretty standard nav that you're gonna find
in most web development scenarios.
And the problem was that, I wanted to center these things.
Both horizontally and vertically.
Which you might say like, oh, that's perfect in flexbox.
But the problem became where I actually wanted the,
see where I'm hovering?
This kinda darker purple.
That is the link part, 'cause you wanna be able
to click anywhere on that darker purple.
So I wanted that to be stretched.
I wanted that to stretch regardless of how high.
Like you'll see that this line, this is three lines high.
And this one is only one.
So sometimes it's only gonna be one line high,
sometimes it'll be three lines high.
And I wanted it to just stretch to the height
of the biggest one,
which is something flexbox does very well.
The problem with that is, if you want to center them
in that box, then all of a sudden that purple box went
from being this high, 'cause by default the align-item
is stretch, and the align-item went to center,
which it was just the height
of the actual content inside of it.
So, I asked around on Twitter and I finally figured it out.
Which is, the answer to it is nesting flexbox.
So what we're gonna do in this code along is,
I'm gonna start you off with the HTML and the CSS
which I thought we're gonna run into the problem.
And then I'm gonna show you how
we can both edit the CSS and the HTML.
We're gonna have to add one extra element in here,
and we're gonna show you how to fix it.
So, let's get rollin'.
Alright, so what I have open here is our style.css
and our index.html.
Those are just two kinda starter files.
And in our style.css, I've just got some base styles.
So it looks pretty good.
If you open up in your browser it looks like this.
You should see that these things are sort
of running together 'cause by default they're links.
And I added a whole bunch of padding to them
and because links are inline, their padding is going
to overlap and not push them down.
But, not to worry.
We're gonna fix all of that.
And what I also did here is I just took the style,
margin and padding off 'cause by default
that's what all this looks like.
So.
Let's get up and running.
The first thing we need to do is, since these li's,
if you see, we're working with the ul.
The ul is going to be our flex container.
And the list items are going to be our flex items.
Flex container, flex items.
And the way we do that is we say, display: flex.
And what that will do is, right away it starts
to look quite a bit better.
We've got all of our list items here.
And they're really just taking up
as much room as they need to.
We've got a little bit of extra space right here.
And you can see a little bit of unevenness at the bottom.
And the way we take care of that,
how do we kinda distribute the extra space evenly?
Well, we say .slider-nav li, which is our flex item.
(typing)
Oh.
Let's go ahead and say our first flex item
and then maybe up here let's give ourselves a comment.
Our flex container.
And I say first because we're gonna actually be nesting them
in just a second, so.
And the way we do that is we'll just say flex:1.
And that will just make them all even.
So give it a refresh, and whoa!
What happened, it starts to look like crap again.
Well, when I don't know what's going on with my layout,
my number one thing to do, is I just put a tiny,
little red border around all of the elements, just
to sorta understand where they are.
And I'll give that a refresh.
Okay, this makes a little bit more sense
to us where we've got these list items.
And they're actually falling perfectly into place.
It's just the links that are giving us some grief.
We are going to make these nested flex in just a second.
But we're not gonna get there just yet,
so let's say,
.slider-nav a.
Just say display: block with 100%.
And what that will do is--
There we go,
that'll just make things look a little bit nicer
so we can kinda see what we're dealing with here.
Again, we've got our flex item, which is this.
And then we've got our individual links inside of that.
Now a couple things I want to happen here.
I want these links to stretch themselves entirely across.
And then I want the text
to be centered both horizontally and vertically.
And then finally, I want these arrows on either end,
to be a lot smaller.
So let's actually start with those arrows.
We will go ahead and select each of them.
.slider-nav li,
er, .arrow, I think that's it,
let's check our HTML, yup.
We got a class arrow, and a class arrow.
We coulda also said slider-nav li:
first-child,
and then also do a last one but we got a class on there.
So let's stick with that.
And I want these to be about half the size of the rest.
So I'm actually gonna put flex:1 on here and then go back
to our other one and make that a flex:2, so that these ones
will take up double the room of the arrows.
So let's see how we're doin' there.
Okay, that looks a lot better.
We've got these two arrows being a little bit smaller
than the rest of them.
Now I wanna go ahead and center the text.
So let's look at our flex items here and just centering
horizontal is just text-align: center, we can do
that pretty quickly, that looks good.
But now is where the hard part comes.
This is where I thought I was almost done,
and I could just say like, align-items: center
and we'd be off to the races.
So let's try that.
If you remember from the, one of the first videos,
the align-items
goes on the cross axis.
So if you remember it from left to right is the main axis
and the cross axis by default is top to bottom.
So, that's what we want.
We want aligned items 'cause we wanna center these suckers
vertically across this axis right here.
Where do we put align-items?
If you're not sure, you can always head back
to the CSS-Tricks article here.
And go and look for the align-items property.
Let's just take a look here.
(typing)
Align-items, here we go.
The align-items, it looks like it goes on the parent.
The flex container.
So what's the flex container in our situation?
Well, it's the ul.
So we need to go back up to that.
And we'll say,
align-items:center.
And then this is where I thought I'd be good to go.
Refresh, and--oh!
Well, that's not exactly what I wanted.
Now it depends on how much content is in there.
Now they're just resizing them.
So the default is something called stretch.
Which is great, because you can see on the list items.
We're not talking about the links just yet.
The list items are stretching as high as the highest one is,
which is, this one is setting the height of it.
If we were to change that,
like if you added a whole bunch more content in there.
You'll see that the list items, all of 'em span the height
of the tallest one.
So, that align-items: center,
(typing)
doesn't really work for us, because we still want them--
We essentially want center, and we want align-items:stretch.
You can't just do both, unfortunately.
So what we actually need to do is do neither of these.
And what we kinda wanna say is,
the list items should stretch all the way,
the lengths should stretch all the way.
And then whatever's inside
of it will vertically align itself.
What we actually need to do now, is use nested flexbox.
So this slider-nav li, it is still going to be a flex item.
Same with the arrow, they are gonna be flex items
and you can still append a flex property to a flex item.
However, we can also make it a flex container as well.
So we'll say display:flex.
We'll say display:flex and still flex:2,
so maybe we'll put a little comment there that says,
this is flex
item -ish.
So that's like a property that would go on a flex item.
But then this, this is flex
container -ish.
And when we say display:flex on that list item there,
give it a refresh.
Ah-ha-hah!
Now we're starting to get places.
Because we made this list item display:flex,
it is now a flex container and now what is our flex item?
Well, if you make something a parent, a flex container,
then the immediate child, which in this case is our links,
they become flex items.
So that's great, we already got a selector down here.
And this is where we can take off all of that,
and don't worry about that, we can just say flex-basis:100%.
Okay, good.
So that got us a little bit further.
We just took off that temporary fix, and now
since this is a flex item we can use our flex-basis.
However we still have the problem of the vertical centering.
We still aren't able to vertically center them.
And I really wish we just had like a text-align:vertical
right now and just save it, and we'd be off to the races.
But it's just not something that we have in CSS.
So what we could try is, we could try,
on our list items,
say align-items:center
and maybe that will center it.
It does, but (laughs),
we still have the problem
of these items since they're not by default they're stretch,
by saying this, we're saying the links,
these guys right here need to stretch.
But,
that still doesn't work.
It's similar, and maybe you think, oh,
well we also have one called align-self.
And could we say align-self:center?
No, that does the same thing.
That just tells the list items to align itself
in the center of the parent.
Again, we're in the situation where we want,
maybe we'll put a little comment, we want
to stretch
as well
as center.
So, we need to go one step further
and do another display:flex.
Now, if we say display:flex on this one right here,
and give it a save.
You'll see that, okay good.
This is pretty much what we want.
Only now we've got a couple more issues.
And when we made that display:flex, let me bring that back.
What it did,
is it stretched them all the way across.
However, like,
look at the--our text line center
no longer goes all the way across, as well
as the vertically centering doesn't work out all just yet.
If we make the link flex, which is now a flex container,
as well as a flex item,
we don't have a flex item that's inside of the link.
'Cause if you look at a link,
this is just the content, right?
So we don't have any element inside of here
that we can then apply our align-items to.
This is unfortunately where we need to go ahead
and add another element inside of this link.
And the easiest way to sorta do that is to just wrap a span
around all of the elements that we have.
Just gonna wrap a span around each of those.
And we will give ourselves a selector for that.
So .slider-nav span,
and we can give ourselves a little comment that says,
this is the flex item.
And on our link here, we can now say align-items:center,
because when we say align-items, it's going
to take the child flex item and center it.
So let's see where that brings us.
Okay, good, good, good.
Now we're almost there.
I got a couple of issues here now.
We've got,
it looks like these links right here
aren't centering themselves.
Looks like none of our text is centering us.
We've got a little bit of a weirdness going on here.
So what we need to do is,
because by default spans are displayed inline, we need
to change those to display: block.
And refresh.
That does nothing for us, why?
'Cause we need to give it a width of 100%.
Okay, getting there, getting there.
Our one last little issue that we have here is like,
what's going on with this one.
Why is it kinda wrapping around here?
And I'm not actually sure what's going on here.
Probably a little bug on my end, you're probably yelling
at me right now.
It's super clear--Oh!
There we go.
So I, (laughs) when I wrapped the span around the text,
it looks like I didn't get it all.
So let me jump back to this one right here.
Oh and it's 'cause it was on a multiline.
Make sure you put all the text inside of the span.
And.
That should do it.
Let me take off that little, red, ugly border there
to make sure we're okay.
And we're hovering it, great.
Maybe I wanna add some font size
to the--Oops!
Not to those.
I wanna add it just to the arrows.
So,
.arrow a.
Font-size: 30px.
There we go, that's kinda the one nice thing about flexbox,
is you can just jack-up the font size,
and you're not gonna mess up your vertical centering
on the items that are different font sizes.
So, I know that's a little bit confusing to follow.
However, if you ever run into a situation
where you need items to both stretch
as well as be vertically centered, you have
to do the whole nesting flexbox thing.
And hopefully this will be a pretty decent,
little starter template that you can pull out of
and sorta customize to make your own.
See you in the next video.
(whistling)
(slow, cheery music)